---
layout: post
title: "OChess"
date: 2024-01-15
categories: project
tags: SDL ocaml c
excerpt: "OChess is a personal project where I developed a chess interface using OCaml. It features standard chess rules, a user-friendly GUI, and robust error handling. Inspired by a functional programming class, this project showcases my skills in OCaml and full-stack application development."
---

## Overview
OChess is a chess interface that I developed as a personal project. The implementation of the chess game logic is written in standard OCaml, and the GUI implementation was developed using [TSDL](https://github.com/dbuenzli/tsdl) and its associated packages, ([TSDL_image](https://github.com/tokenrove/tsdl-image) for importing textures, [TSDL_ttf](https://github.com/tokenrove/tsdl-ttf) for rendering text). TSDL provides bindings for the C library  [Simple DirectMedia Layer (SDL)](https://github.com/libsdl-org/SDL) in OCaml, offering more flexibility and simplifying the handling of user input and other complex features. All source code is original with the exception of 'log.ml', which is provided by the authors of TSDL to assist in error handling and debugging.

## Motivation
This project was inspired by a functional programming class I took at McGill University. Seeing the power in ML, I wanted to challenge myself by solving a problem unlike anything we had done in class in terms of both scale and functionality.

## Features
- **Standard Chess Rules**: Implements all standard chess rules, including castling, en passant, and pawn promotion.
- **User-Friendly GUI**: Several features including previous move highlighting, possible moves highlighting, previous captures, and a turn indicator make the application simple and intuitive to use.
- **Lazy Evaluation**: Utilizes lazy evaluation to efficiently generate possible moves, improving performance, especially in complex board states. Only the relevant moves are evaluated, reducing the computational overhead and enhancing the responsiveness of the user interface.

## Technologies Used
- **OCaml**: The core logic of the chess game is implemented in OCaml, leveraging its functional programming capabilities.
- **TSDL**: Used for creating the GUI, providing bindings for the SDL library in OCaml.
- **TSDL_image**: Facilitates the importing of textures for the GUI.
- **TSDL_ttf**: Used for rendering text within the application.

## Video Demo
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/2xmiSDq6Tb8" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Future Improvements

- **AI Opponent**: Implementing an AI opponent to allow users to play against the computer.
- **Sound Effects**: Implement sound into the game.


## Links
- [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/ntonnes/ochess)